# Making Logical Arguments Formal

We are all familiar with contructing arguments using natural language. This is convenient for us, as humans, as it allows us to express ourselves in the way that is most natural. However, it is not a representation that is very amenable to computation. Even in the age of large language models, computers are still not able to reason *rigourously* using natural language. To be truly rigourous, we have to represent our arguments in a way that is more naturally amenable to mathematical manipulations.

## Propositions as Symbols

Consider the following sentence:

> If I am going outside and it is not raining then I do not take a coat or an umbrella.

Note that this sentence alone is not an argument: it is a statement - a proposition, which can be be True or False. We can also see that it is a compound proposition, made up of four atomic propositions:

- It is raining
- I am going outside
- I take a coat
- I take an umbrella

Clearly these are also propositions and they are irreducible. We can ther to be able to represent them using symbols. Let us choose to represent them as $R$, $O$, $C$, and $U$ respectively. Using this notation we may then expect to be able to write the compound sentence is a form something like:

`if (O and not(R)) then not(C or U)`

This is rather cumbersome and doing the logical equivalent of algebra with our symbols will be much easier is we introduce some more notation for the *connectives* that join our propositions together.

## Connectives

In our example we have used four logical connectives to construct a compound statement from atomic propositions. We will also introduce a fifth connective that is widely used in logic:

| **Operation** | **Name** | **Symbol** | **Behaviour** |
| `NOT` | Negation | $\lnot$ | $\lnot P$ is true when $P$ is False, and False when $P$ is True.  |
| `AND` | Conjunction | $\land$ |$P\land Q$ is True only when both **conjuncts** $P$ and $Q$ are both True, and is False if either $P$, or $Q$, or both $P$ and $Q$ are False. |
| `OR` | Disjunction | $\lor$ |$P\lor Q$ is true when $P$ is True, or $Q$ is True, or when both **disjuncts** $P$ and $Q$ are True. If is only False when both disjuncts are False. |
| `IMPLIES` | Material implication (if-then) |$P\implies Q$ is True except when $P$ is False and $Q$ is True. |
| `IFF` | Biconditional | $\iff$ | $P\iff Q$. $Q$ is True if-and-only-if $P$ is True.|


### Negation (`NOT`)
The truth table for negation is:

| $A$ | $\lnot A$ |
|:---:|:---------:|
| T   |  F        |
| F   |  T        |

Given the atomic proposition $R$ ("It is raining"), the statement ("It is not raining") can be expressed as $\lnot R$.

### Conjunction (`AND`)

| $A$ | $B$ | $A\land B$ |
|:---:|:---:|:----------:|
| T   | T   | T          |
| T   | F   | F          |
| F   | T   | F          |
| F   | F   | F          |

The statement "it is not raining and I am going outdoors" can be represented using `AND` and `NOT` operators as $\lnot R \land O$. Notice that the `NOT` operation applies only to $R$.

### Disjunction (`OR`)

| $A$ | $B$ | $A\lor B$  |
|:---:|:---:|:----------:|
| T   | T   | T          |
| T   | F   | T          |
| F   | T   | T          |
| F   | F   | F          |

The statement "I will not take a coat or an umbrella" therefore becomes $\lnot(C\lor U)$. Notice that in common language, we often use the word "or" to mean "exclusive-or" (`XOR`), which is True when one of the disjuncts is True, but not when both are True. We will always interpret `OR` to mean "either or both" which is consistent with the usual interpretation of "I will not take a coat or an umbrella": I will not take a coat, I will not take and umbrella, and I won't take both of them.

### Material Implication (`if-then`)

| $A$ | $B$ | $A\implies B$ |
|:---:|:---:|:-------------:|
| T   | T   | T             |
| T   | F   | F             |
| F   | T   | T             |
| F   | F   | T             |

Note that this is not the same as the `if-then` construct in Python or other programming languages, because it does not assign a value to anything. In propositional logic we should think about it not as a mechanism for assignment, but as a binary logic operator that should be treated in the same way as conjuction and disjunction. The statement $R\land O \implies U$ is True except when $R\land O$ is False and $U$ is True and nothing is assigned to anything.

The Truth table for Implication is a little counter intuitive. Essentially it reflects that if the premise is not True, then we can say nothing about the conclusion. Logic doesn't provide is with tools that express the notion that something "might be True" so we take the possibility of something being true to be equivalent to that same thing being True. Of course, if the premise (condition) is False, then it doesn't matter!

Lets's think about this in terms of a concrete example. Let's define:

- $A$: "It is raining"  
- $B$: "I get wet"

So the implication $A\implies B$ translates as "It is raining implies I get wet", or more naturally "If it is raining then I get wet". If the two propositions $A$ and $B$ are both True, then the implication is clearly True. If $A$ is True and $B$ is False ("If it is raining I don't get wet"), then the implication is clearly False. If $A$ is False and $B$ is True, ("If it is not raining I get wet"), we define the implication to be True, but this is what known as a **vacuous truth**: if the premise ("It is raining") is False then nothing is implied about the conclusion - False implies anything. A slightly clearer example of this is "If pigs could fly then hell would freeze over". The premise can never be True and so whether the conclusion is True or False is irrelevant. If you find this confusing, you are in good company! *Remember the Truth Table.*

### Biconditional (if-and-only-if: `iff`)

| $A$ | $B$ | $A\iff B$ |
|:---:|:---:|:---------:|
| T   | T   | T         |
| T   | F   | F         |
| F   | T   | F         |
| F   | F   | T         |

The biconditional is a little more intuitive than the Material conditional. It is True whenever $A$ and $B$ are the same. It is related to Material Implication: $P\iff Q \equiv (P\implies Q) \land (Q\implies P)$ Notice that this is very closely related to `XOR` which is True when $A$ and $B$ are different - can you write down the relationship?

Let's now revisit our sentence

> If it is not raining and I am going outdoors then I will not take a coat or an umbrella.

We can rewrite this using the symbols for the atomic sentences and the logical connectives that we have just defined:

> $(\lnot R \land O)\implies \lnot(C\lor U)$

This allows us to construct a Truth Table for the sentence, so we can see if it "behaves" as we would expect:

| $R$ | $O$ | $C$ | $U$ |   | $\lnot R\land O$ | $\lnot(C\lor U)$ |   | $(\lnot R \land O)\implies \lnot(C\lor U)$ |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:-:|:-----------------:|:----------------:|:-:|:------------------------------------------:|
| T   | T   | T   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | T   | T   | F   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | T   | F   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | T   | F   | F   | |  F                | T                | | T                                          |
| T   | F   | T   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | F   | T   | F   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | F   | F   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| T   | F   | F   | F   | |  F                | T                | | T                                          |
| F   | T   | T   | T   | |  T                | F                | | F                                          |
| F   | T   | T   | F   | |  T                | F                | | F                                          |
| F   | T   | F   | T   | |  T                | F                | | F                                          |
| F   | T   | F   | F   | |  T                | T                | | T                                          |
| F   | F   | T   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| F   | F   | T   | F   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| F   | F   | F   | T   | |  F                | F                | | T                                          |
| F   | F   | F   | F   | |  F                | T                | | T                                          |

We see that the implication is False when it is not raining, I am outside, and I have taken either a coat or an umbrella. This makes sense because these situation directly contradict the statement. In all other cases, the implication is True. It does not contradict the implication to not take a coat or umbrella when it is raining and I am outside, and it does not contradict the assertion to take a coat or umbrella when it is not raining and I am not outside.
