# Why do we need graphs?

One justification for knowledge graphs is that they allow us to represent *relations* in data. We already have relational databases though, so what does the graphical formulation give us? Let us consider how we would represent this problem in a relational database. Typically we would have a table for each entity, with the 

In a relational database we could represent academic staff using a table that would include their name, their staff ID, and a dedicated primary key.

|uid (PK)| staffID | name      |
|:-------|:--------|:----------|
| 1      |12345    |Iain Styles|
| 2      |54321    |Hui Wang   |
| 3      |12321    |Lu Bai     |

We would define modules in a similar way, with the notion of `taughtby` encoded via a reference to the primary key of the teacher in the staff table.

|mid (PK) |moduleID | name     | taughtBy |
|:--------|:--------|:--------------|:---------|
|11|45678    | Introduction to AI    | 3    |
|12|56789    | Machine Learning      | 2    |
|13|67890    | Knowledge Engineering | 1    |

This clearly represents the data, but it is hardly transparent. Information is spread across multiple tables, relationships are encoded but not in a direct way, normalisation has to be enforced, and it is not very human-readable when there are many records and tables.

Compare this to a graphical representation. Relationships are represented directly, it is naturally normalised and human-readable. Entities that are related to each other are close in the graph. The graph can, of course, be constructed from a properly structured (ie in Boyce-Codd normal form) relational database in which the data is properly normalised and relations correctly represented, but the database would need to be structured with that in mind to guarantee that this is possible.

## Some basic properties of graphs

The graphical representation also has some other advantages, beyond the "naturalness" of representing entities as nodes and relations as edges. Very importantly, the use of a totally flexible abstract data structure permits the application of a rich algorithmic tapestry of graph algorithms that can be used to find shortest paths, clusters of related nodes, and for visualisation of data using, for example, force-directed networks. It is helpful to remind ourselves of some basic properties and definitions of graphs.

* A graph consists of a *set* $V$ of nodes or vertices and a set $E$ of edges.
* Each edge is a *tuple* of two vertices.
* Vertices $v_i$ and $v_j$ are *adjacent* if $(v_i, v_j)\in E$.
* Edge can, but do not need to have a direction such that $(v_i, v_j)\neq(v_j, v_i)$.
* Edges can be *weighted*, which assigns a distance between the connected nodes.
* Graphs can be represented in terms of a *connectivity matrix*, where each entry in the graph corresponds to the weight of the connection between the corresponding nodes.

All of these properties are true of knowledge graphs and so any algorithms than can be used on regular graphs can also be used on knowledge graphs. However, knowledge graphs are additive to regular graphs, introducing types and attributes for nodes and edges. This brings with it additional complexities but also additional possibilities. One of these is that we will want to specify what types of nodes can be connected together: a *grammar* for the graph, often referred to as a *schema* or *ontology*.